---
layout: post
title: "GCP Tour"
summary: "Understanding the Google Cloud Platform!"
author: souzaeduardoac
date: '2020-08-27 20:21:23 -0300'
category: cloud
thumbnail: /assets/img/posts/gcp_banner.jpg
permalink: /blog/gcp-tour/
---


When we give a try to GCP, it's often confusing to undestang what's going on, especially if never used a cloud platform before.

With this series, we are going to take a look into the main resources of the platform.

When we just log in, we receive a dashoard of a project. That project can be switched right at the top bar!

At the dashboard, you will see the information of the selected project.
That section has the name, id and number of the project for GCP they are used for interacting with the resources of the google cloud.

Non-personal accounts usually have organizations containing multiple projects, each project with a diferente set of resources.

On top left of the screen we have the Navigation Menu, which contains the platform's services separeted in sections:

> * Compute: contains machine types that support any type of workload. The different options let you choose how much you want to be involved with operational details and infrastructure.
> * Storage: contains storage options such as data storage and databases for structured or non structured, relational or non relational data.
> * Networking: contains services that handles applications traffic and security rules.
> * Cloud Operations: contains a set resources of cross-cloud logging, monitoring, trace, and other service reliability tools.
> * Tools: contains resources for developers to manage 
application pipelines.
> * Big Data: contains services that allow you to analyze large datasets.

For example, in the **IAM & admin** section, we can define who will be able to access each resource, the roles work as like described above:

> * roles/viewer: read-only actions.
> * roles/editor: read-only actions + permissions for actions that modify state, such as changing existing resources.
> * roles/owner: have complete access to all actions.

At the **APIs & Services** section is where the joy of a develop lies. This section contains all APIs provided by the platform such as Maps SDK, Youtube, AdSense, Google Play Services, Firebase and so on.

At the **billing** section, we can find the monetary related information of our projects

Inside **Operations** group, we have some very useful resources such as monitoring, metrics, uptimechecks, logging and so on. 

The Google Cloud Platform also provides access to a few partners, currently (at the time that this post was written), Redis, Kafka, Astra, Elasticsearch and MongoDB.

Also at the top bar, GCP has a Cloud Shell console that allows us to enter commands at a terminal to manage the resources of a project. If we do not desire to use the Cloud Shell at a browser, we can use the CLI.