---
layout: post
title: Password Encryption
author: Eduardo Souza
date: '2020-07-30 20:21:23 -0300'
category:
        - security
summary: Do it right!
thumbnail: /assets/img/posts/password.jpg
---

Let's talk about **passwords**. 
We already know that passwords have levels of strength but... is that enough?

As developers we must think a little deeper.
In a data level, we have database encryption, such as row level / table level that can protect our data, but even that can be broken into.
> * SQL Injection can retrieve data from a encrypted database since it uses the application to perform the attack

There also has a few points to consider about password:
 * Passwords encrypted with the same key can have identical ciphertext
 * The encryption key **must** be stored outside of the database

As a matter of attention, attacker also try to use a _rainbow table_.
> **Rainbow table** is a technique that consists into a dictionary that contains known passwords and their output hashes, usually for cracking password hashes.
> * Series of liked passwords
> * Series of predictable patterns
>
> Rainbow table are usually for insecure hashing algorithms
> * MD5
> * SHA1
> * Any algorithm up to 8 char

A known method to deal with rainbow table is to hash a password with a salt.
> **Salt** is a randomly generated value that is added (prefix, sufix or both) to the password prior to hashing
> * It is not a secret value and should be stored next to the password as plain text
> * Each password should be hashed with its own unique salt. When that happends, rainbow table needs to recompute for each password + salt pair which increases the total computation time and decreases password cracking speed

There are a few known good ways to hash a password securely, using **KDFs (Key Derivation Function)**
 * bcrypt
   * incorporates a salt to protect against rainbow table attacks and is an adaptive function: over time, the iteration count can be increased to make it slower, so it remains resistant to brute-force search attacks even with increasing computation power
 * PBKDF2
   * typically used for deriving a cryptographic key from a password
 * scrypt
   * designed for password storage to be resistant against hardware-assisted attackers by having a tunable memory cost
 * ARGON2
   * ARGON2D is faster and uses data-depending memory access, which makes it highly resistant against GPU cracking attacks and suitable for applications with no threats from side-channel timing attacks
   * ARGON2I uses data-independent memory access, which is preferred for password hashing and password-based key derivation, but it is slower as it makes more passes over the memory to protect from tradeoff attacks
   * ARGON2ID is a hybrid of Argon2i and Argon2d, using a combination of data-depending and data-independent memory accesses, which gives some of Argon2i's resistance to side-channel cache timing attacks and much of Argon2d's resistance to GPU cracking attacks

> KDFs derive bytes suitable for cryptographic operations from passwords or other data using a pseudo-random function (PRF). Different KDFs are suitable for different tasks
> * Cryptographic key derivation
>   * Deriving a key suitable for use as input to an encryption algorithm. Typically this means taking a password and running it through an algorithm such as PBKDF2HMAC or HKDF. This process is typically known as key stretching.
Properly implemented and configured, KDF effectively protects the stored password against attacks.
> * Password storage
>   * When storing passwords you want to use an algorithm that is computationally intensive. Legitimate users will only need to compute it once (for example, taking the user’s password, running it through the KDF, then comparing it to the stored value), while attackers will need to do it billions of times. Ideal password storage KDFs will be demanding on both computational and memory resources

There is also a client side hashing that is a huge problem. Client side hashing leads to pass-hash attack.

> A keystone cryptography principle, kerckoff principle, says that the cryptosystem should be secure even if all the data about the system is public

## How to save the password securely

1. After the user creates the password, it is transmitted in plaintext over a secure channel (TLS) to the server
2. Hash using KDF and store in database
   * User enumeration attack and MITM attack during the data transfer from the application to the database should be considered when creating the authentication functionality

## How to validate password properly

1. After the user enters the username and the password, the plain text pair is transmitted over a secure channel to the server
2. The server hashes the password using KDF and then looks for the username/KDF(password) pair in the database
